Once around
Nemesis. Well, this story really goes
all the way back to a basic question
which is was the sun born alone? And the
sun appears to be a solitary star with
its family of planets, Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, Neptune, and the small inner
rocky planets shown to scale in the
image on the right hand side there along
with a number of other sunlike stars and
a couple of red dwarfs, Schultz's star A
and Proxima Centuri there. And we know
that some of these other star systems
are multiple. The Alpha Centuri system
is three stars. The A and B stars are
sunlike and the third member Proxima
Centuri Alpha Centuri C is a small red
dwarf. And it was thought for a long
time that it was very common for stars
to be in multiple systems, binaries,
triples, and so forth. But actually that
was probably down to it being a bit
biased. We were looking at the stars
that were easy to see and those were
over representing the giant stars, the
massive stars that
were formed in large associations born
into big open clusters where nature
finds it such that it's got a lot of
mass to play with. It's able to form a
lot of big stars and a lot of stars
tends to mean a lot of multiple systems.
Whereas the majority of the smaller
stars now seem to be being born
separately away from many others and at
least 50% of them seem to be on their
own. So a bit of a change in thinking on
that one. But the question is could the
sun have a companion perhaps a small red
dwarf that we haven't spotted yet? And
if not a red dwarf, then perhaps a brown
dwarf. These brown dwarfs are the
missing link between ordinary stars and
giant planets. We have uh on the diagram
here the sun at the top left, then a red
dwarf
star, and then down at the bottom right
we have the earth and
Jupiter. So the earth is about 1% the
mass of Jupiter. So
0.01 mj. Jupiter of course 1
MJ the sun
a,50 over a thousand times the mass of
Jupiter and a small red dwarf star would
come in in that range 75 perhaps up to
500 times the mass of Jupiter half the
mass of the
sun but below that 75 Jupiter mass limit
you don't have enough gravity to create
the pressure and temperature to trigger
off the ordinary hyd hydrogen hydrogen
fusion reaction that creates all the
energy to make a normal main sequence
star. And so there is this region
between
75 Jupiter masses down towards the mass
of a gas giant where you have these
intermediate objects called brown
dwarfs. And we normally limit the range
from 13 to 75 mjupit masses. Below 13,
it would be a large gas giant planet.
And the reason for that distinction is
that the small brown dwarfs um 13 to 75
mj are able to do a little bit of
nuclear fusion in their cores using the
slightly heavier version of hydrogen. So
dutyium
uh hydrogen with an extra neutron in its
nucleus. It's able to do some fusion
reactions using that and also to some
extent some of the lithium that might be
present can get consumed liberating a
little bit of nuclear energy but below
13 MJ that doesn't work at all. And so
really you have a planet and so that's
the distinction. Now, we've got quite
good at finding these brown dwarfs in
the last 20 years or so. One of the
first ones was picked up by uh direct
observation using Palomar and the Hubble
Space Telescope shown there. Gleer 229B.
So, Gleaser 229 is the red dwarf star
and B is the small brown dwarf companion
to it. And at the time of uh pulling
these slides together, we'd got
confirmation of 1,800 brown dwarfs out
there in the galaxy. And indeed, that
number is rising all the time. So, it'll
be into the thousands before very
long. But it's not as many as we were
expecting. It's about the same number of
brown dwarfs as small stars, about one
to one. And we were expecting more,
perhaps six times as many on the basis
that nature finds it easy to get enough
material together to form small objects
and harder to make larger ones. So we
get very few giant stars and as you go
down the mass scale, you get more and
more with 70% of all stars being red
dwarfs. Now that's partly because
they're easy to form and partly because
they live a very long time. So the uh
giant stars um soon die and blow up as a
supernova or end their lives in other
ways. But nevertheless, we are finding a
lot of these. So it's an intriguing
possibility that perhaps a star like the
sun might have either a gas giant
companion or a brown dwarf.
And the reason that people started
suggesting this sort of idea was because
of the long period comets. We have
different classes of comet within our
solar system. These dirty snowballs that
approach the sun, melt, boil off
material, and develop tails stretching
many uh thousands of miles, millions of
miles into space in some
cases, pointing away from the sun as
they are blown by the solar wind. And we
have some of them in the relatively near
part of the solar system orbiting round
in five or 10
years perhaps in lock with Jupiter, the
so-called Jupiter family comets, perhaps
associated with the asteroid belt
between Mars and Jupiter. We have others
that go further out and that are
associated with the Kiper belt of which
Pluto is a member, the second asteroid
belt out there beyond Neptune. And those
can be in orbits that take anything
around a 100 to a few hundred to a
thousand years or
so. Beyond that though, we have the long
period comets that take orbits of a
thousand perhaps a 100,000 astronomical
units out away from the sun all the way
out to maybe one and a half light years
to what's known as the cloud which is
thought to be a reservoir of icy cometry
nuclei dirty snowballs left over from
the original solar nebula that is
distributed in a random pattern roughly
spherically around the sun and that the
pertubations and the near misses in the
or cloud occasionally tip one of them
into a much longer thin orbit diving in
towards the sun and that that can create
a long period comet.
Now in many cases we describe the orbits
of these comets as coming in at random
but there was a suggestion that there
was a bias as I've shown in this diagram
here with the close approach the
perihelion where the comet comes close
to the sun being all rather one-sided
and the aphhelon where the comets go
deep out into the ought cloud all being
tilted or more commonly tilted away from
one side towards the other of the cloud
and this was thought to be very
suspicious. Now echoes of that have
recently
occurred with the discovery of Sednner
an object in what's called the scattered
disc out beyond the orbit of Pluto
beyond the Kiper belt.
Sednner was the first of a number of
discoveries in very long elliptical
orbits. So the Kiper belt and Pluto are
at about 35 to 50 astronomical units.
Neptune is at about 30. So it's a region
just beyond Neptune. But Sedna at its
close approach to the sun, its
perihelion is 76 AU and it goes out to
937 nearly a,000 AU. And that is the
inner edge perhaps of where we would see
the ought cloud beginning to take over.
This it's a very long orbit. Takes
11,400 years to complete one lap. and
Mike Brown of Caltech who's been very
interested in the Kiper belt objects
discovered EIS that set us on the uh
path of wondering what a planet really
was because it was originally felt to be
be larger than Pluto and orbiting around
the sun out there in the Kiper belt and
a potential planet
candidate. Well, he had a look at the
orbit of Sednner. And to give a little
quote here, he said, "Sednner just
shouldn't be there. There is no way to
put Sedna where it is. It never comes
close enough to be perturbed by the sun,
and it never goes far enough away to be
affected by other stars. So it's in this
no man's land between the strong
influence of the sun, the kiper belt,
and interior to that the rest of the
planetary realm. It's in this outer
region, the so-called scattered disc.
And as we found more objects, the
sedoids that are in similar orbits, a
pattern began to emerge, very similar to
the pattern that I was talking about for
the long period comets with all the
elliptical orbits being tipped in one
direction as if there's something wrong
with the other side of the solar system
over there to the right of the diagram.
All the close approaches, the perihelons
are very closely clustered around one
region near the sun and the elliptical
orbits all spread out on the far side.
And so Mike Brown postulated that there
was a ninth planet in the solar system
controlling all of this. Perhaps a gas
giant that we hadn't discovered. Perhaps
something else. and that this was
corelling the long period comets and
indeed the sedoids all over to one side
of the solar system forcing their
perihelians to cluster away from the
orbit of planet 9 otherwise they would
encounter it and be
unstable.
Well, we then went on and discovered
some more objects. This one 2014
SR349 which confirmed the idea. um
brought the probability that this was
random chance up to around 97
uh% in favor of there being an effect
and 3%
randomness. And then we found 2013 FT28
which is here. Uh which confused
everybody because well it's still
managing to avoid planet 9 but it didn't
really quite fit the pattern if indeed
planet 9 is in such an orbit.
Um
well very very interesting. Maybe
something is going on. And another
proposal back in
1999 was again that there was an outer
planet
Tai, the Greek goddess of fortune, the
good sister of Nemesis. And this was
suggested to be four times the mass of
Jupiter. So, not massive enough to be a
brown dwarf, a really large gas giant in
an orbit maybe 15,000
AU, a quarter of a light year, taking
1.8 million years to go around the sun.
Uh, very long distance, explaining why
we hadn't been able to see this object.
And it would be pretty chilly out there.
Um the only source of heat really
wouldn't be getting much heat from the
sun would be the original heat trapped
within the body as a result of fusion of
sorry of formation not from any nuclear
fusion and perhaps a little bit of
radioactivity. if it had managed to pick
up a load of radioactive isotopes early
on in the formation process that could
still be generating heat through
radioactive decay. And so it was
postulated that it might be at about 200
Kelvin - 73
centigrade. So an interesting
idea. Now all of these suggestions, the
long period comet, the existence of
planet 9 or planet Tiki um out there
were also the subject of speculation
based on a completely different line of
reasoning and that was the pattern of
mass
extinctions. Over the last 550 million
years or so, complex creatures have
evolved from the Cambrian era all the
way through to
now. And each seems to generate a an
increasing number of diversity of
species and families of
creatures leading up to a peak and then
something bad happens. It seems that
that era ends abruptly and the eras
themselves are of course defined by the
fossils. So it the end of a given era is
the end of a line of fossils in the
fossil record which seems to disappear
really rather abruptly in most
cases as if something catastrophic has
occurred.
And just looking at the pattern, the
human brain is very very good at
spotting patterns in the data. And as
you look at this, you do start to feel
that there is something going on, that
there is a repeating pattern hiding in
the data. And you can do all sorts of
spectral analysis on the the the rates
of mass extinctions and so forth. And if
you do that, then it's fairly easy to
come up with the feeling that there is a
26 to 27 millionyear repeat period in
the disappearance of all kinds of
creatures. So this is everything from
the large vertebrates, the
invertebrates, the
protozonean, all sorts of different
species of different
categories seem to be suffering about
every 26 to 27 million years.
Now it was suggested that this might
have an
origin beyond the earth and that one
possibility could be associated with
impacts of asteroids and space rocks
coming in and hitting the earth. Well,
at the time that this was originally
suggested back in the 80s, there were
only a very small number of craters that
were proven to be the results of impacts
and just two events that seemed to line
up with known craters. And that was the
Cretaceous to Paleo gene transition 66
million years ago with the impact that
Alvarez uh hypothesized and located at
Chickixaloo on the Yucatan Peninsula in
Mexico where a 20 kilometer sized object
smashed into the ground at hyper
velocity um creating the most enormous
explosion. a shock wave traveling
halfway around the world, wiping out
almost anything that it came across.
Huge amounts of material being vaporized
and melted and blasted out of the
atmosphere to rain down as molten glass
all over the the world, setting fire to
just about every tree on the planet. So
a true disaster of uh epic proportions
and one of the largest mass extinctions
immediately
followed. That was 66 million years ago
and is represented in the bottom
picture. The top two pictures are the
craters at the right papa guy and at the
left a schematic of the Chesapeake Bay
impact sites that date back to 33 and a2
million years ago which is the eosene to
oligosene transition point in the fossil
record and it seems there was another
mass extinction and that it was perhaps
associated with more than one impact
event. Now, we've been identifying more
and more craters and being able to date
them more and more accurately. And so we
can have uh a look at a chart of the
crater formation rate on the earth which
is shown with this orange trace from the
left hand side being now going back over
250 million years with the large impact
craters Papa and Chesapeake Chicksaloo
that I've already mentioned and some
older ones there marked with the arrows
all the way back to Manikuagen in Quebec
uh 215 million years ago and we see a
pattern
there. Is there a repeating interval
between them?
Well, you can see that there's a
possibility that the interval between
those peaks might be something that was
of the order of 25 to 30 million years
between them. There's 30 million between
the Papa Guy event and Chickixaloo. Um
there's 26 million between the uh some
of the other gaps. It it's
plausible. And in fact, if we compare it
with the interval with the extinction
events, then there does seem to be a
very similar pattern. The uh graph on
the left is extinction of entire
families plotted going from 0 to 250
million years ago. And I think you can
see that some of the peaks line up, but
not necessarily all of them. So maybe
this is not the whole story, but maybe
it's part of the story that the impact
craters have uh created some if not all
of the major extinctions.
Well, all of this taken
together really leads us to having a
look at the original Nemesis hypothesis
which actually predated some of the
events like the discovery of Sedna. But
I put it in this order because I wanted
to lead up to this point.
Two independent teams both published the
same idea that the sun might have a red
dwarf or substellar companion out there
one and a half light years away from the
sun in an orbit that was 95,000
astronomical units. So very very
distant. And this was back in 1984 when
it was first suggested before really
we'd even all agreed about Chickaloo and
the impact of uh the asteroid that took
out the
dinosaurs. And the idea was that this
object named Nemesis could be orbiting
out there and at that distance it would
be plowing through the cloud. If it was
on a long elliptical orbit, it would
make periodic transits through the or
cloud and as it did so disturb
the vast numbers of comets out there and
cause them to pick up different
trajectories, many of which would come
hurtling into the inner solar system,
creating a giant storm of comets.
Now, they would take quite a long time
to fall in depending on how they were
deflected. They could take a 100,000
years to come in from out in the or
cloud. Maybe they could even take a
million or maybe even a few million
years to fall into the inner part of the
solar system. And so the impacts such as
they might be on planets in the inner
solar system such as the Earth could be
spread over a considerable period of
time. They don't all have to happen at
once. And this might explain why there
is some evidence that the impact spikes
might be rather blurred because it might
have taken a whole series of impacts to
have ruined the climate, created that
nuclear
winter. And one of those was perhaps the
most recent. This was 14 million years
ago.
The climate had been in the mid meioene
period a very very nice warm climate
with life being highly abundant and then
suddenly in terms of the fossil time
scale things changed. The climate cooled
dramatically. There was a spike in
oxygen 18 isotopes detectable in the
fossil record. And on the seafloor we
find heavy metals like barerium and
uranium. Now those could be the product
of volcanic eruptions bringing those
materials to the surface, but it's just
as likely that they were delivered by
asteroid impact. And certainly the
change in the climate seems associated
with a fairly substantial extinction at
this mid meiosene disruption of the
biosphere as it's
called. And if we look at the
cratering that we know about there are
two craters. Nordlinger rice 24
kilometer crater in Germany and another
one that is the Stenheim crater 3.8
kilometers across. Now these date back
to around about 14.8 8 million years ago
in the case of the Nordinger rice and
the Stenheim crater was originally
thought to be part of a binary asteroid
that came in and created the two
together but it's been dated as slightly
younger by about 500,000 years. Uh but
there's no reason to exclude that as
being part of a shower of impacts that
would have come in perhaps from the
latest disruptive Nemesis event as
Nemesis plowed through the UT cloud and
sent all this stuff hurtling our way.
And what you've got to remember with
craters is that 70% of the Earth's
surface is covered in ocean. So we only
get to see and detect just less than a
third of the total impacts. So if we see
two, there were probably um going to be
about uh half a dozen fairly large
impacts, some of which landed underwater
and we don't get to see them anymore.
They've been silted up. So it could be
that 14.8 8 million years ago, there was
a quite significant bombardment of the
Earth. And if that was caused by Nemesis
coming to perihelion, sweeping through
the or cloud and sending a load of stuff
our way, well, 14 million years later,
it would be half its orbit further
round. If it's taking 26 27 million
years to do a lap, then 14 million years
is about half of that. And so it would
be at ah ah ah ah ah ah ah ah ah ah
ahelon 95,000 AU one and a half light
years away from the sun at the moment
and be very hard to detect.
But if we put all of this together, we
take the orbits of the long period
comets and the potential asymmetry in
those suggesting that they have their
perihelion on one side of the sun. Then
perhaps the perihelion of Nemesis is on
the other side and that would tell us
which direction to look in terms of its
aphelon when it's far from the sun. that
would be on the other side of the sun to
where it makes a clo close close
approach. And so we're perhaps talking
about somewhere in the constellation of
Hydra just below the ecliptic. Now Hydra
is quite a big long thin constellation
but the math sort of suggests a plane on
the sky and a region quite a few degrees
long that seems to land roughly in this
area marked out by the long
constellation of Hydra there. So that
would be the place to go look to see if
you could spot this uh substellar
companion of the sun Nemesis.
Well, people have been looking, but the
question really is why have we not found
it? And the first part of the
explanation is that what we will be
looking for in the 19th century and the
20th century surveys that looked for
nearby objects would be the high proper
motion across the sky. The rapid change
of position of an object gives away the
fact that it has a high proper motion, a
high relative
velocity across the sky compared to our
motion around the galaxy. And so it
appears to change position against the
background of stars very rapidly. And
the animation here and the image, that's
Barnard's star, which is one of the
objects that has the highest proper
motion detectable, changing its position
just over a few years there against the
background. But a companion of the sun,
Nemesis, wouldn't really show up in
these studies because it and the sun
would have the same average velocity
around the galaxy. And in such a long
orbit, its orbital velocity would be
pretty slow. So, we really would
probably not have noticed it in all of
these early surveys. What we really
needed to do was not look for an object
that was moving, but for to look for an
object that was
warm. Warm because of that heat of
formation.
warm perhaps if it was a red dwarf star,
it should be glowing in the visible part
of the spectrum. But if it was a brown
dwarf or a large gas giant, the residual
heat within it, depending on uh how it
formed and how massive it was, whether
it had carried out a limited amount of
dutyium or lithium fusion as a brown
dwarf or not, but the certainly the heat
of radioactive materials within it would
warm it up above the background
temperature and so it should be visible
in the infrared giving off thermal
radiation.
Well, the IRAS satellite back in the
1980s surveyed the sky looking for
infrared
sources, failed to find Nemesis at all.
That was followed by the two mass survey
97 to 2001 that was active and that also
failed to detect any large unknown
bodies that were glowing with heat in
and around our solar system. So they
failed to find
anything. The latest is the Wise
spacecraft and this has been used to
track down many brown dwarfs out there
in the galaxy. Recently finding some
just 6.6 light years away, just a little
further away than Barnard's star. So
relatively near to the sun, but not
Nemesis. Nemesis would be round about
that 1 to one and a half light years
away, much uh closer in. And we should
have seen it if it was there. Certainly
anywhere out to about 10 light years,
Wise would have found anything warmer
than 150 degrees
Kelvin. So glowing away in the infrared.
And it was able to rule out anything
larger than Saturn all the way out to
10,000 astronomical units or Jupiter
sized objects out to 28,000 astronomical
units. So, I'm afraid that ideas of
planet Tai or planet X or planet 9 being
a large gas giant planet like uh Jupiter
in an orbit of 15,000 AU. Well, we just
haven't spotted it, so it cannot be. Uh
we would have found it by
now. Well, when this happens and people
have a hypothesis, they're often quite
uh stubborn about letting go of it. And
so we get a phenomenon that I've noticed
before and my talks about the planet
Vulcan and other ideas uh have echoes of
this in them. So do check those out as
well. But this is the one in this case
Nemesis
lost. Maybe Nemesis was once in orbit
around the uh sun and maybe it isn't
there now which is why we can't find it
anymore. Maybe it was lost back in the
past a long time ago. And it could well
be that it's uh orbit taking it out to 1
and a half
AU is so far from the sun that it's
almost at the point of being unbound
uncoupled by the sun's gravity. In
fact, the tipping point between being
bound by the Alpha Centuri system with
its uh three stars and rather larger
mass in total than our sun is somewhere
around about that one and a half au. The
so-called hill sphere of the sun is not
much larger than one and a half
astronomical units. And the hill sphere
is the region where the sun's gravity
dominates over the overall gravity of
all of the rest of the material in the
Milky Way. So beyond that one and a half
au light years you would become
uncoupled from the sun. So maybe Nemesis
has detached itself and gone a
wandering. And one possible reason that
that might have occurred is that we do
occasionally have stars that pass by the
sun. And a passing star coming fairly
close to the sun would alter that
balance. And if it came closer to
Nemesis than the sun was, it could
easily strip it away and unbound bind
it. And Schultz's star is a case in
point. Schultz's star. I did a video
about that as well. Go check that out.
But that came past us just 70,000 years
ago. Um it's a pair of objects. There
was Schultz A and Schultz B. Um, A is a
red dwarf and B is one of those brown
dwarfs and they came past close enough
to perhaps affect the cloud in terms of
sending comets our way and could
potentially have interacted with uh
Nemesis or any of these giant outer
hypothetical planets in the process.
Now, the fact that it was 70,000 years
ago would have certainly perturbed the
comets. They could still be comets from
that event falling in towards us. As I
said, it can take a 100,000 or even a
million years for comets to come into
the inner solar system. So, maybe
there's a whole stream of comets on
their way triggered by Schultz's
star. But uh it's probably too recent in
this particular case to be responsible
for removing Nemesis. But other stars
have come close in the past in hundreds
of thousands or millions of years. And
so you know any time in the last 10
million years it would be perfectly
reasonable for a close approach to have
stripped Nemesis away from us. Even if
it didn't, it might have kicked it into
a slightly perturbed orbit. And Mller,
one of the proponents of the Nemesis
hypothesis, suggested that this might
have happened a number of times,
changing the orbit of Nemesis and
therefore accounting for the slightly
wobbly nature of the extinction pattern.
And that's an interesting point because
it could be that the orbit has not
always been
identical. Certainly the orbit of things
like Schultz's star was affected or the
trajectory of it was affected by the
close pass of the
sun. So maybe maybe not. But what about
other explanations for all of this?
Well, there are some interesting ones
which I wanted to mention.
One of them is that those close passing
stars could be responsible for the whole
thing. Maybe we encounter passing stars
with a degree of
regularity. And one option for that is
that as the sun orbits around the center
of mass of the Milky Way, we take about
230 million years to do a lap. But as we
do so, we periodically pass through the
speed humps, the spiral arms. These are
not solid structures. They are temporary
over densities rather like a knot of
traffic forms on the uh the motorway or
the
freeway for no reason at all other than
a pressure wave traveling through the
the cars being transmitted by uh the
close proximity of of uh dense traffic.
And this can happen with stars as well.
They interact with each other where
they're over dense. Gravity is a bit
stronger and you get a sort of pile up
and the sun will pass into one of these
spiral arms, be accelerated towards it
by the over density and the excess mass
and then slow down again as it comes out
the other side. But in the process it
will be close to a lot more stars. And
so perturbations of the cloud and storms
of comets could be one possibility to
result from our passage through these
spiral arms. And maybe this is
accounting for the entire
effect. Those spiral arms are not
entirely regular and symmetrical. So
again, comet storms coming at some
interval but a ve slightly variable
interval is a very good candidate.
Another one is that as we travel around
the sun on on with the sun on its
journey around the Milky Way over 230
million
years, we wobble up and down. We
oscillate about the galactic plane going
perhaps 250 light years above the plane
and then below it with a period of
around 32 million years which is not too
dissimilar for from the number that
we've been looking at. And so maybe the
galactic plane itself has an over
density of matter lying in a flat sheet.
And that as we cross through the plane,
the ought cloud gets disturbed. And
again, we get a storm of comets coming
into the inner solar system for a few
million years every 30 or so million.
And maybe that is responsible for this
pattern in the mass extinctions. Now it
explains the mass extinctions doesn't so
much explain some of the other mysteries
of Sednner and uh the uh long period
comets but uh these are interesting
possibilities but one that I came across
was related to dark matter and the plane
crossing of the galaxy.
It's conceivable, and there are quite
sophisticated physics theories, that
there might be a thick layer of dark
matter along that galactic plane just
one or two light years wide. And that as
the Earth passes through there, not only
will it have a gravitational effect and
perturb the cloud, but it could affect
the core of the Earth. And as we pass
through, we would get a significant
increase in dark matter streaming
through the Earth. Now, normally it's
inert. It passes straight through
ordinary matter. Doesn't react hardly at
all. But reacting just a little bit
might be enough to increase nuclear
reactions going on in the core of the
Earth. It might speed the decay of
radioisotopes. Um, it might trigger
nuclear fishision events and it
certainly might release more energy. And
a pulse of energy being released in the
deep core of the Earth would gradually
find its way up out of the inner core to
the outer core and into the mantle and
create additional mantle heat plumes.
And additional mantle heat plumes could
burst forth to the surface and trigger
volcanic eruptions or even super
volcanoes, flood bassalt events. And it
seems that some of those mass
extinctions are associated with flood
bassults, not necessarily with impact
events. Sometimes there appear to be
both going on at the same time. So maybe
this is part of the explanation that the
flood bassalt events are being triggered
by the interaction of dark matter with
the earth's core. Now this is entirely
theoretical. There's not really any
proof of this, but it just goes to show
that there's a lot more that we still
have to learn about all of this.
And to finish off with, I just wanted to
mention the Nibbu
cataclysm. This is a predicted encounter
between Earth and a large hypothetical
planetary object called Niribu. The name
comes from um the uh publications on the
ancient astronaut basis of Zechariah
Sitkin and his interpretation of
Babylonian and Sumerian mythology.
I say interpretations. Well, these are
exaggerations. Really, I'm not a fan of
this, but I thought I'd mention it
anyway because it's a chance to
introduce a picture that I just love.
The picture on the right is often
claimed to be Nibu coming towards us,
ready to cause the doom of
mankind, but it isn't. It's an object
called V838
Monoserotus. And this is a truly
fascinating object in its own right and
deserves its own episode. So uh when I
get round to it, I will be doing once
around V838 monocerotus. So do have a
look at that. Um but the narabu theory
stain stems actually back to 95 with
Nancy Lauder and her Zeta talk website.
Uh it's unbelievable. Well, she claims
to be in contact with extraterrestrials
from the Zeta reticuli star system
through a brain implant in her head. Um,
and have been chosen to warn mankind
that near is on its way and are going to
sweep through the solar system and
disturb the orbit and the orientation of
the Earth's poles with a near miss, not
a
collision. Uh but she claimed that it
was going to happen in May
2003 and well that date has been
postponed and postponed and postponed
because it didn't
happen and uh well we're all still here
aren't we? And I just wanted to point
out that um there is one really strong
piece of evidence that we shouldn't
ignore and that is that we have sent
five different spacecraft out of the
solar system. Pioneer 10 and 11, Voyager
1 and Voyager 2 and the New Horizons
spacecraft are all heading out of the
solar system and we're still in contact
with New Horizons Voyager 1 and Voyager
2 as they exit the solar system. The
distance of Voyager 2 is now about 120
astronomical units. So well out beyond
Neptune and Pluto getting out into that
scattered disc region. Um and we have
detected no deviation of the flight path
that we can't explain through physics
means caused by the unknown
gravitational effect of any large object
out there in the um outer part of the
solar system. There was at one stage an
effect called the Pioneer anomaly where
the Pioneer spacecraft appeared to be
veering off course and that too caused a
lot of speculation about a gravitational
influence of an unknown body. But it was
all pinned down to
asymmetrical heat release from the
onboard nuclear isotope power generator
of the spacecraft which uh was just
giving it a gentle push in one direction
more than another because of the uh
release of infrared radiation uh due to
one side being warmer than the other.
And once that was taken into account
everything fits. So, I'm afraid that all
of this uh speculation seems to be
pointing towards there not being an
unknown large object out in the solar
system. But I really hope we're wrong
and I really hope we do find something.
So, with that, thanks very much for
listening and I'll bring this one to a
close.